'\" t
.\" $Id$
.tr ~
.TH SEMCOR 7WN "30 Sept 1997" "WordNet 1.6" "Miscellaneous WordNet\(tm Topics"
.SH NAME
semcor \- discussion of semantically tagged texts
.SH DESCRIPTION
A semantic concordance is a textual corpus and a lexicon so combined
that every substantive word in the text is linked to its appropriate
sense in the lexicon.  Thus it can be viewed either as a corpus in which
words have been tagged syntactically and semantically, or as a lexicon
in which example sentences can be found for many definitions.  Texts
that were used to create the semantic concordances were extracted from
the Brown Corpus and then linked to senses in the WordNet lexicon.
  
The semantic tagging was done by hand, using various tools to annotate
the text with WordNet senses.  The "raw" data were reformatted and
syntactically tagged (using Eric Brill's stochastic part-of-speech
tagger) before semantic tags were assigned.  After semantic tagging,
the files conform to the SGML-like file format described in
.BR cxtfile (5WN).
The tools and programs used to create the semantic concordances are
not distributed.

.BR escort (1WN)
is a window-based browser used to search the semantic concordances for
instances of semantically tagged word forms.  It can be used to find
semantic tags to one or more senses of a word and optional
co-occurring senses.

.SS Semantic Concordance Organization
The semantically tagged Brown Corpus files are divided into three
semantic concordances based on what was tagged and when.  Each is
stored in a separate directory by the concordance's name (\fIconc\fP).
The concordances are:

.TS
center box ;
c | c | c
l | l | l.
\fIconc\fP	\fBContents	What's Tagged\fP
_
brown1	103 Brown Corpus files	All open class words
brown2	83 Brown Corpus files	All open class words
brownv	166 Brown Corpus files	Verbs
.TE

Each directory contains the files \fBcntlist\fP, \fBtaglist\fP and
\fBstatistics\fP, and a \fBtagfiles\fP directory.  See
.BR cntlist (5WN)
and
.BR taglist (5WN)
for information about these files.  See
.SB STATISTICS
for information about the contents of the \fBstatistics\fP file.

The \fBtagfiles\fP directory contains the semantically tagged files.
Each file is named using the following convention:

	\fBbr-\fP\fIarticle_code\fP

where \fIarticle_code\fP is a letter followed by a two digit number
that denotes the section and article number that the text was derived
from.  No file is in more than one semantic concordance.
.SS Semantically Tagged Files
An SGML-like markup language, described in
.BR cxtfile (5WN),
was developed for codifying semantically tagged data.  The original
content of a Brown Corpus file, with the exception of headlines when
they were present, is contained in its corresponding semantically
tagged file.  The "raw" data are segmented into paragraphs and
sentences, then sequentially numbered within the file.  Each sentence
is separated into word forms and punctuation.  

A \fIsemantic tag\fP associated with a word form indicates one or more
senses in the WordNet database that are appropriate for that word form
in the textual context.  Semantic tags are represented as SGML
attribute/value pairs, and are described in detail in 
.BR cxtfile (5WN).

Only nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs (open class words) can be
semantically tagged, as these are the only classes of words
represented in WordNet.  Proper nouns are generally not in WordNet,
but are labeled in the semantically tagged files with one of four
categories and assigned semantic tags to predetermined WordNet senses
for these categories.

.TS
center box ;
c | c | c
l | c | l.
\fBAttribute/Value Pair	WordNet Sense	Sense Key\fP
_
pn=person	1	person%1:03:00::
pn=location	1	location%1:03:00::
pn=group	1	group%1:03:00::
pn=other	\fIn/a\fP	\fIn/a\fP
.TE

Strings of several words that form a collocation or phrase found in
WordNet are joined into one word form in a semantically tagged file
and tagged as a single unit.  In the case of discontinuous
constituents (a collocation in which the words are not adjacent, such
as \fIlook up\fP in the phrase \fIlook the number up\fP) the first
word of the collocation is "redefined" as the entire collocation and
is tagged to the appropriate WordNet sense.  The remaining words are
marked with a special attribute/value pair that indicates which word
form contains the semantic tag.
.SH STATISTICS
.TS 
center box;
c | c s s | c
c | c s s | c
c | c | c | c | c.
\fB	Semantic Concordance\fP
Category	_	Total
\fB	brown1	brown2	brownv	\fP
_
.T&
c | s s s s
l | r | r | r | r.
\fBMiscellaneous\fP
_
total word forms (\fB<wf>\fP)	198796	160936	316814	676546
word forms with \fBcmd=done\fP including \fBot=\fP	122724	98235	53421	274380
word forms with \fBcmd=done\fP  excluding \fBot=notag\fP	107118	86255	41607	234980
word forms with semantic pointers (\fBwnsn=\fP)	106639	86000	41497	234136
word forms tagged to multiple senses	115	551	37	703
total semantic pointers (including multiple senses)	106725	86414	41525	234664
untagged word forms (\fBcmd=ignore\fP + \fBot=\fP)	92154	74936	135684	302774
_
.T&
c | s s s s
l | r | r | r | r.
\fBNumber of Semantic Pointers\fP
_
semantic pointers to nouns	48835	39477	0	88312	
semantic pointers to verbs	26686	21804	41525	90015
semantic pointers to adjectives	9886	7539	0	17425	
semantic pointers to adverbs	11347	9245	0	20592
semantic pointers to adjective satellites	9970	8347	0	18317
Total semantic pointers	106724	86412	41525	234661
_
.T&
c | s s s s
l | r | r | r | r.
\fBPointers to Proper Nouns\fP
_
pointers to \fBpn=person\fP	3815	2783	0	6598
pointers to \fBpn=location\fP	600	363	0	963
pointers to \fBpn=group\fP	740	440	0	1180
pointers to \fBpn=other\fP	447	489	7	943
=
Total pointers to proper nouns	5602	4075	7	9684
_
.T&
c | s s s s
l | r | r | r | r.
\fBUnique WordNet Senses\fP
_
senses pointed to by nouns	11399	9546	0	20945
senses pointed to by verbs	5334	4790	6520	16644
senses pointed to by adjectives	1754	1463	0	3217
senses pointed to by adverbs	1455	1377	0	2832
senses pointed to by adjective satellites	3451	3051	0	6502
=
Total senses	23393	20227	6520	50140
.TE	

The previous table was compiled from the data in the \fBstatistics\fP
file in each concordance directory.  

Note that there are 7 attribute/value pairs that assign proper nouns
to the category "other" in the concordance \fBbrownv\fP.  These proper
nouns were incorrectly identified as verbs by the syntactic tagger.
See
.BR cxtfile (5WN)
for a detailed discussion of the attribute/value pairs.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.TP 20
.B WNHOME
Base directory for WordNet.  Unix default is 
\fB/usr/local/wordnet1.6\fP, PC default is \fBC:\ewn16\fP, Macintosh
default is \fB:\fP.
.TP 20
.B WNSEARCHDIR
Directory in which the WordNet database has been installed.  Unix
default is \fBWNHOME/dict\fP, PC default is \fBWNHOME\edict\fP,
Macintosh default is \fB:Database\fP.
.TP 20
.B SEMCORDIR
Directory in which the semantic concordance package has been
installed.  Unix default is \fBWNHOME/semcor\fP, PC default is
\fBWNHOME\esemcor\fP and Macintosh default is \fB:Semcor\fP.
.SH FILES
All files are in \fBSEMCORDIR/\fIconc\fR on Unix platforms,
\fBSEMCORDIR\e\fIconc\fR on PC platforms, and
\fBSEMCORDIR:\fIconc\fR on Macintosh platforms.
.TP 20
.B cntlist
file listing number of times each tagged sense occurs in semantic
concordance \fIconc\fP
.TP 20
.B taglist
file listing location of all tagged senses in semantic concordance
\fIconc\fP
.TP 20
.B statistics
statistics for tagged files in semantic concordance \fIconc\fP
.TP 20
.B tagfiles/br-*
semantically tagged Brown Corpus files in semantic concordance
\fIconc\fP (Unix)
.TP 20
.B tagfiles\ebr-*
semantically tagged Brown Corpus files in semantic concordance
\fIconc\fP (PC)
.TP 20
.B tagfiles:br-*
semantically tagged Brown Corpus files in semantic concordance
\fIconc\fP (Macintosh)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR escort (1WN),
.BR cntlist (5WN),
.BR cxtfile (5WN),
.BR senseidx (5WN),
.BR sensemap (5WN),
.BR taglist (5WN),
.BR wnpkgs (7WN).
.LP
For a description of the Brown Corpus:
.LP
Francis, W. N., and Kuc\*vera, H. (1982). \fI"Frequency Analysis of
English Usage: Lexicon and Grammar"\fP, Houghton Mifflin Company,
Boston.
.LP
For more information on semantic concordances:
.LP
Miller, G.A., Leacock, C., Tengi, R., and Bunker R. T. (1993). 
A Semantic Concordance, \fI"Proceedings of the ARPA WorkShop on
Human Language Technology"\fP. San Francisco, Morgan Kaufman.
.LP
Landes, S., Leacock, C., Tengi, R. (1998).
Building Semantic Concordances. \fI"WordNet: An Electronic Lexical
Database"\fP, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
