Table of Contents

NAME

semcor - discussion of semantically tagged texts

DESCRIPTION

A semantic concordance is a textual corpus and a lexicon so combined that
every substantive word in the text is linked to its appropriate sense in the
lexicon. Thus it can be viewed either as a corpus in which words have been
tagged syntactically and semantically, or as a lexicon in which example
sentences can be found for many definitions. Texts that were used to create
the semantic concordances were extracted from the Brown Corpus and then
linked to senses in the WordNet lexicon. The semantic tagging was done by
hand, using various tools to annotate the text with WordNet senses. The
"raw" data were reformatted and syntactically tagged (using Eric Brill's
stochastic part-of-speech tagger) before semantic tags were assigned. After
semantic tagging, the files conform to the SGML-like file format described
in cxtfile(5WN) . The tools and programs used to create the semantic
concordances are not distributed.

escort(1WN) is a window-based browser used to search the semantic
concordances for instances of semantically tagged word forms. It can be used
to find semantic tags to one or more senses of a word and optional
co-occurring senses.

Semantic Concordance Organization

The semantically tagged Brown Corpus files are divided into three semantic
concordances based on what was tagged and when. Each is stored in a separate
directory by the concordance's name (conc ). The concordances are:

            conc           Contents            What's Tagged

           brown1   103 Brown Corpus files  All open class words

           brown2   83 Brown Corpus files   All open class words

           brownv   166 Brown Corpus files  Verbs

Each directory contains the files cntlist , taglist and statistics , and a
tagfiles directory. See cntlist(5WN) and taglist(5WN) for information about
these files. See STATISTICS for information about the contents of the
statistics file.

The tagfiles directory contains the semantically tagged files. Each file is
named using the following convention:

   br-article_code

where article_code is a letter followed by a two digit number that denotes
the section and article number that the text was derived from. No file is in
more than one semantic concordance.

Semantically Tagged Files

An SGML-like markup language, described in cxtfile(5WN) , was developed for
codifying semantically tagged data. The original content of a Brown Corpus
file, with the exception of headlines when they were present, is contained
in its corresponding semantically tagged file. The "raw" data are segmented
into paragraphs and sentences, then sequentially numbered within the file.
Each sentence is separated into word forms and punctuation.

A semantic tag associated with a word form indicates one or more senses in
the WordNet database that are appropriate for that word form in the textual
context. Semantic tags are represented as SGML attribute/value pairs, and
are described in detail in cxtfile(5WN) .

Only nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs (open class words) can be
semantically tagged, as these are the only classes of words represented in
WordNet. Proper nouns are generally not in WordNet, but are labeled in the
semantically tagged files with one of four categories and assigned semantic
tags to predetermined WordNet senses for these categories.

          Attribute/Value Pair  WordNet Sense       Sense Key

          pn=person                   1        person%1:03:00::

          pn=location                 1        location%1:03:00::

          pn=group                    1        group%1:03:00::

          pn=other                   n/a       n/a

Strings of several words that form a collocation or phrase found in WordNet
are joined into one word form in a semantically tagged file and tagged as a
single unit. In the case of discontinuous constituents (a collocation in
which the words are not adjacent, such as look up in the phrase look the
number up ) the first word of the collocation is "redefined" as the entire
collocation and is tagged to the appropriate WordNet sense. The remaining
words are marked with a special attribute/value pair that indicates which
word form contains the semantic tag.

STATISTICS

                                             Semantic Concordance
                  Category                                           Total
                                            brown1  brown2  brownv

                                Miscellaneous

 total word forms (<wf> )                  198796   160936  316814  676546

 word forms with cmd=done including ot=    122724    98235   53421  274380

 word forms with cmd=done excluding
 ot=notag                                  107118    86255   41607  234980

 word forms with semantic pointers (wnsn=
 )                                         106639    86000   41497  234136

 word forms tagged to multiple senses         115      551      37     703

 total semantic pointers (including
 multiple senses)                          106725    86414   41525  234664

 untagged word forms (cmd=ignore + ot= )    92154    74936  135684  302774

                         Number of Semantic Pointers

 semantic pointers to nouns                 48835    39477       0   88312

 semantic pointers to verbs                 26686    21804   41525   90015

 semantic pointers to adjectives             9886     7539       0   17425

 semantic pointers to adverbs               11347     9245       0   20592

 semantic pointers to adjective satellites   9970     8347       0   18317

 Total semantic pointers                   106724    86412   41525  234661

                          Pointers to Proper Nouns

 pointers to pn=person                       3815     2783       0    6598

 pointers to pn=location                      600      363       0     963

 pointers to pn=group                         740      440       0    1180

 pointers to pn=other                         447      489       7     943

 Total pointers to proper nouns              5602     4075       7    9684

                         Unique WordNet Senses/TR>

 senses pointed to by nouns                 11399     9546       0   20945

 senses pointed to by verbs                  5334     4790    6520   16644

 senses pointed to by adjectives             1754     1463       0    3217

 senses pointed to by adverbs                1455     1377       0    2832

 senses pointed to by adjective satellites   3451     3051       0    6502

 Total senses                               23393    20227    6520   50140

The previous table was compiled from the data in the statistics file in each
concordance directory.

Note that there are 7 attribute/value pairs that assign proper nouns to the
category "other" in the concordance brownv . These proper nouns were
incorrectly identified as verbs by the syntactic tagger. See cxtfile(5WN)
for a detailed discussion of the attribute/value pairs.

ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

WNHOME
     Base directory for WordNet. Unix default is /usr/local/wordnet1.6 , PC
     default is C:\wn16 , Macintosh default is : .
WNSEARCHDIR
     Directory in which the WordNet database has been installed. Unix
     default is WNHOME/dict , PC default is WNHOME\dict , Macintosh default
     is :Database .
SEMCORDIR
     Directory in which the semantic concordance package has been installed.
     Unix default is WNHOME/semcor , PC default is WNHOME\semcor and
     Macintosh default is :Semcor .

FILES

All files are in SEMCORDIR/conc on Unix platforms, SEMCORDIR\conc on PC
platforms, and SEMCORDIR:conc on Macintosh platforms.

cntlist
     file listing number of times each tagged sense occurs in semantic
     concordance conc
taglist
     file listing location of all tagged senses in semantic concordance conc
statistics
     statistics for tagged files in semantic concordance conc
tagfiles/br-*
     semantically tagged Brown Corpus files in semantic concordance conc
     (Unix)
tagfiles\br-*
     semantically tagged Brown Corpus files in semantic concordance conc
     (PC)
tagfiles:br-*
     semantically tagged Brown Corpus files in semantic concordance conc
     (Macintosh)

SEE ALSO

escort(1WN) , cntlist(5WN) , cxtfile(5WN) , senseidx(5WN) , sensemap(5WN) ,
taglist(5WN) , wnpkgs(7WN) .

For a description of the Brown Corpus:

Francis, W. N., and Kucera, H. (1982). "Frequency Analysis of English Usage:
Lexicon and Grammar" , Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston.

For more information on semantic concordances:

Miller, G.A., Leacock, C., Tengi, R., and Bunker R. T. (1993). A Semantic
Concordance, "Proceedings of the ARPA WorkShop on Human Language Technology"
. San Francisco, Morgan Kaufman.

Landes, S., Leacock, C., Tengi, R. (1998). Building Semantic Concordances.
"WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database" , MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

   * NAME
   * DESCRIPTION
        o Semantic Concordance Organization
        o Semantically Tagged Files
   * STATISTICS
   * ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
   * FILES
   * SEE ALSO
