.\" $Id$
.tr ~
.TH CXTFILE 5WN "30 Sept 1997" "WordNet 1.6" "WordNet\(tm File Formats"
.SH NAME
Format of semantic concordance file
.SH DESCRIPTION
A semantic concordance consists of texts that have been syntactically
and semantically tagged.  The semantic tagging was done by hand, using
various tools to annotate the English text with WordNet senses.  The
"raw" data were reformatted and syntactically tagged before semantic
tags were assigned.  See
.BR semcor (7WN)
for more information about semantic concordances.  

For historical reasons, semantic concordance files are referred to as
\fIcontext files\fP.  Some of the field element within context files
reflect that history, as well.  
.SS File Format
Regardless of which files comprise a semantic concordance, and which
words are tagged, the format of each concordance file is the same.
The context file format follows SGML guidelines, using elements and
attribute/value pairs to record information about the file, paragraph
and sentence boundaries, and syntactic and semantic information.  SGML
elements give a file its structure; attribute/value pairs provide
additional information.  All SGML elements require both start and end
tags.

SGML attribute/value pairs are of the form:
.nf
		\fIattribute\fP\fB=\fP\fIvalue\fP
.fi

Our SGML format deviates from the standard in that \fIvalue\fPs are
only enclosed in quotation marks when there may be embedded spaces.
Due to the large number of attribute/value pairs, the presence of
quotation marks around each \fIvalue\fP would have substantially
increased the size of the concordances.
.SS Nomenclature
The structure of a context file is specified below in pseudo-BNF
notation.  Each SGML element is on a separate line.  Terminals are
printed in \fBboldface\fP and are represented in the file as written.
Items in \fIitalics\fP are variables.  Upper-case strings are
non-terminals.  
.SS File Structure

.nf
CONTEXTFILE~~::=~~\fB<contextfile~~concordance=\fP\fIconc\fP\fB>\fP
		CONTEXT+\fB
		</contextfile>\fP

CONTEXT~~::=~~\fB<context~~filename=\fP\fIfilename\fP~~\fBparas=yes>\fP
		PARA+~~|~~SENT+
		\fB</context>\fP

PARA~~::=~~\fB<p~~pnum=\fP\fIparagraph_number\fP\fB>\fP
		SENT+~~
		\fB</p>\fP

SENT~~::=~~\fB<s~~snum=\fP\fIsentence_number\fP\fB>\fP
		SENT_TOK+ 
		\fB</s>\fP

SENT_TOK~~::=~~(~~WORD_FORM~~|~~PUNC~~)+

WORD_FORM~~::=~~\fB<wf~~cmd=tag\fP~~RDF~~SEP~~POS~~\fB>\fP\fIword\fP\fB</wf>\fP
		| ~~\fB<wf~~cmd=ignore\fP~~DC~~SEP~~POS~~\fB>\fP\fIword\fP\fB</wf>\fP
		|~~\fB<wf~~cmd=done\fP~~RDF~~SEP~~POS~~SEM_TAG~~OT\fB>\fP\fIword\fP\fB</wf>\fP
		|~~\fB<wf~~cmd=(update~~|~~retag)\fP~~RDF~~SEP~~POS~~TAGNOTE~~NOTE\fB>\fP\fIword\fP\fB</wf>\fP

POS~~::=~~\fBpos=\fPPOS_TAG

POS_TAG~~::=~~\fBCC~~|~~CD~~|~~DT~~|~~EX~~|~~FW~~|~~IN~~|~~JJ~~|~~JJR~~|~~JJS~~|~~LS~~|~~MD~~|~~MD|VB~~
	|~~NN~~|~~NNP~~|~~NNPS|~~NNP|NP~~|~~NNP|VBN~~|~~NNS~~|~~NN|SYM~~|~~NP~~|~~NPS~~
	|~~PDT~~|~~POS|~~PP~~|~~PR~~|~~PRP~~|~~PRP$~~|~~RB~~|~~RBR~~|~~RBS~~|~~RP
	|~~TO~~|~~UH~~|~~VB~~|~~VBD~~|~~VBG|~~VBN~~|~~VBP~~|~~VBZ~~|~~WDT~~|~~WP|~~WP$~~|~~WRB\fP

SEM_TAG~~::=~~LEMMA~~WNSN~~LEXSN~~PN~~|~~NULL

LEMMA~~::=~~\fBlemma=\fP\fIlemma\fP

WNSN~~::=~~\fBwnsn=\fP\fIsense_number\fP

LEXSN~~::=~~\fBlexsn=\fP\fIlex_sense\fP

PN~~::=~~\fBpn=\fPCATEGORY~~|~~NULL

CATEGORY~~::=~~\fBperson\fP~~|~~\fBlocation\fP~~|~~\fBgroup\fP~~|~~\fBother\fP

RDF~~::=~~\fBrdf=\fP\fIredefinition\fP~~|~~NULL

DC~~::=~~\fBdc=\fP\fIdistance\fP~~|~~NULL

SEP~~::=~~\fBsep="\fP\fIseparator_string\fP\fB"\fP~~|~~NULL

TAGNOTE~~::=~~\fBtagnote=\fPTAGNOTE_TYPE

TAGNOTE_TYPE~~::=~~\fBsns_miss\fP~~|~~\fBindist_sns\fP~~|~~\fBwd_miss\fP~~|~~\fBinsuffctxt\fP~~|~~\fBsense_lost\fP~~|~~\fBmisc\fP

NOTE~~::=~~\fBnote="\fP\fInote\fP\fB"\fP

OT~~::=~~\fBot=\fPOTHER_TAG~~|~~NULL

OTHER_TAG~~::=~~\fBnotag\fP~~|~~\fBmetaphor\fP~~|~~\fBidiom\fP~~|~~\fBcomplexprep\fP~~|~~\fBforeignword\fP~~|~~\fBnonceword\fP

PUNC~~::=~~\fB<punc>\fPPUNC_CHARACTER\fB</punc>\fP

PUNC_CHARACTER~~::=~~[~~\fB~~,~~.~~?~~!~~,~~;~~(~~[~~)~~]~~`~~'~~$~~"~~:\fP~~]
.fi
.SS Interpretation of SGML Elements
.TP 10
\fB<contextfile~~concordance=\fP\fIconc\fP\fB>\fP
This element indicates the beginning of a context file.
\fIconc\fP specifies the name of the semantic concordance that the
file is in.  A semantic concordance file contains one or more
context elements from the same semantic concordance.  See
.BR semcor (7WN)
for a list of semantic concordance names.
.TP 10
\fB<context~~filename=\fB\fIfilename\fP~~\fBparas=yes>\fP
This element indicates the beginning of a context.
\fIfilename\fP is the name of the original corpora file from
which this context was extracted.  \fBparas\fP indicates that this
document contains paragraph delimiters.
.TP 10
\fB<p~~pnum=\fB\fIparagraph_number\fP\fB>\fP
Start of a new paragraph. \fIparagraph_number\fP is an integer. The
first paragraph in a \fBcontext\fP is numbered \fB1\fP, and paragraph
numbers are incremented sequentially.
.TP 10
\fB<s~~snum=\fB\fIsentence_number\fP\fB>\fP
Start of a new sentence. \fIsentence_number\fP is an integer.  The
first sentence in each \fBcontext\fP is numbered \fB1\fP, and sentence
numbers are incremented sequentially throughout the \fBcontext\fP.
Sentence numbers \fIdo not\fP restart at \fB1\fP in each paragraph.
.TP 10
\fB<wf\fP~~\fIattribute/value_pairs\fP\fB>\fP\fIword\fP\fB</wf>\fP
This element represents a word form.  \fIword\fP is the orthographic
form as it appears in the original document.  All of the syntactic and
semantic information is stored as attribute/value pairs described
below.
.RS +10
.TP 15
\fBcmd=\fP\fIcmd\fP
Indicates the status of the \fBwf\fP element.

.TS
box;
c | c
l | l.
\fIcmd\fP	\fBMeaning\fP
_
tag	word is to be tagged
done	word is semantically tagged
ignore	word should not be tagged
update	used during semantic concordance development only
retag	used during semantic concordance development only
.TE
.TP 15
\fBpos=\fP\fIpos\fP 
\fIpos\fP is the syntactic tag assigned by Eric Brill's stochastic
part-of-speech tagger.  See 
.SM Syntactic Tags
below for a list of possible values.
.TP 15
\fBlemma=\fP\fIlemma\fP
The base form of the word or collocation that the other
attribute/value pairs in this \fBwf\fP pertain to.  This is the form
of the string used to search the WordNet database.  If \fBrdf\fP is
present, \fIlemma\fP is the base form of the redefinition.
When \fBpn\fP is present, \fIredefinition\fP, \fIlemma\fP and
\fIcategory\fP all have the same value.
.TP 15
\fBwnsn=\fP\fIsense_number\fP
\fIsense_number\fP is the integer sense number corresponding to the
WordNet output display. 
.TP 15
\fBlexsn=\fP\fIlex_sense\fP 
\fIlex_sense\fP, when concatenated onto \fIlemma\fP using \fB%\fP as
the concatenation character, creates a \fIsense_key\fP that indicates
the WordNet sense to which \fIword\fP should be linked.  This is the
semantic tag for \fIword\fP.  The format of a \fIsense_key\fP is
described in
.BR senseidx (5WN). 
.TP 15
\fBpn=\fP\fIcategory\fP 
Indicates that \fIword\fP is a proper noun categorized as one of the
values of CATEGORY.
When \fBpn\fP is present, \fIredefinition\fP, \fIlemma\fP and
\fIcategory\fP all have the same value.
.TP 15
\fBrdf=\fP\fIredefinition\fP 

If present, \fIword\fP has been "redefined" to something else.  This
is mainly used to define discontinuous collocations, correct
typographical errors in the text, or to enter a string that should be
used to search WordNet instead of \fIword\fP in order to find an
appropriate sense for the semantic tag.  When \fBpn\fP is present,
\fIredefinition\fP, \fIlemma\fP and \fIcategory\fP all have the same
value.
.TP 15
\fBdc=\fP\fIdistance\fP
Indicates that \fIword\fP is part of a discontinuous collocation in
which the words comprising the collocation are not adjacent.
\fIdistance\fP is an integer that specifies how many \fBwf\fP elements
away the semantic tag for the collocation is.  It may be either
negative, indicating \fBwf\fP elements prior to this one, or positive,
indicating \fBwf\fP elements following in the file.
.TP 15
\fBsep="\fP\fIseparator_string\fP\fB"\fP
Indicates that the space between this \fBwf\fP element and the next
should be displayed as \fIseparator_string\fP.  The string may be one
or more character.  The default word separator is one space.
.TP 15
\fBtagnote=\fP\fItagnote_type\fP
A \fBtagnote\fP attribute/value pair is always present if \fIcmd\fP is
\fBupdate\fP or \fBretag\fP.  This is used only during semantic
concordance development, and indicates the type of problem encountered
during semantic tagging.  See TAGNOTE_TYPE for a list of possible
values.
.TP 15
\fBnote="\fP\fInote\fB"\fP
A \fBnote\fP attribute/value pair is always present with
\fBtagnote\fP. \fInote\fP may contain a string that provides
additional information about the \fBtagnote\fP, or may be empty.
.TP 15
\fBot=\fP\fIother_tag\fP
If present, a semantic tag cannot be assigned to \fIword\fP for one of
the reasons listed in OTHER_TAG.
.SS Syntactic Tags
The following tags are assigned by Brill's stochatstic part-of-speech
tagger.

.TS
center box;
c | c 
l | l.
\fBSyntactic Tag	Interpretation\fP
_
CC 	Coordinating conjunction
CD 	Cardinal number
DT 	Determiner
EX 	Existential "there"
FW 	Foreign word
IN 	Preposition or subordinating conjunction
JJ 	Adjective
JJR 	Adjective, comparative
JJS 	Adjective, superlative
LS 	List item marker
MD 	Modal
NN 	Noun, singular or mass
NNP	Proper noun, singular
NNPS	Proper noun, plural
NNS	Noun, plural
NP 	Proper noun, singular
NPS 	Proper noun, plural
PDT 	Predeterminer
POS 	Possessive ending
PP 	Personal pronoun
PR	Pronoun
PRP	Pronoun
PRP$	Pronoun, plural
RB 	Adverb
RBR 	Adverb, comparative
RBS 	Adverb, superlative
RP 	Particle
SYM 	Symbol
TO 	"to"
UH 	Interjection
VB 	Verb, base form
VBD 	Verb, past tense
VBG 	Verb, gerund or present participle
VBN 	Verb, past participle
VBP 	Verb, non-3rd person singular present
VBZ 	Verb, 3rd person singular present
WDT 	Wh-determiner
WP 	Wh-pronoun
WP$ 	Possessive wh-pronoun
WRB 	Wh-adverb
.TE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR escort (1WN),
.BR senseidx (5WN),
.BR wndb (5WN),
.BR morphy (7WN),
.BR semcor (7WN).
